Title: Real-Time Chat Application using Axios & Socket.io

Objective:

To develop a full-stack real-time chat application that enables multiple users to send and receive messages instantly using WebSocket connections. The app demonstrates two-way communication between the server and clients through Socket.io, while Axios is used to retrieve previously stored messages via REST API.

Technology Stack:

Frontend: React (Vite), JavaScript, HTML5, CSS3

Backend: Node.js, Express.js, Socket.io

Libraries Used: axios, socket.io-client, cors

Port: 5000 (server), 5173 (client)

Description:

This experiment demonstrates how real-time communication works between the client and the server using WebSockets.
The backend is built with Node.js and Express, where Socket.io handles event-based communication.
The frontend is made using React, where users can enter their name, type a message, and instantly see updates from other connected users without page refresh.

Messages are fetched initially through a REST API (/api/messages) using Axios, and new messages are exchanged live through Socket.io.
Each message is stored with:

user name

message text

timestamp (ts)

unique sender ID (socket.id)

To prevent duplication, the app filters out messages sent by the same client based on senderId.
Whenever a user sends a message, it appears instantly on their own screen and is broadcasted to all other users in real-time.

Features Implemented:

Real-time two-way communication using Socket.io.

Axios GET request to load previous chat history.

Instant message update without page reload.

Multiple user connections supported simultaneously.

Auto-scroll to latest message.

Modern centered UI with user-specific message bubbles.

Duplicate message prevention using senderId.

Message structure includes: { id, user, text, ts, senderId }.

Flow of Execution:

Start backend:

node server.js


→ Server runs on http://localhost:5000

Start frontend:

npm run dev


→ React app runs on http://localhost:5173

Open two browser tabs → Enter different names (e.g., Shivom & Aman).

Send messages → Both users see updates instantly.

Check terminal → Displays user connect/disconnect logs.

(Optional) Use Thunder Client → GET http://localhost:5000/api/messages to see all stored messages.